
# A Critique of Design Challenges in the Hiring Process

As design challenges are becoming more of a staple in the design interview process, there has also been a growing conversation around the ethics of design challenges. The most significant criticism has been towards companies who may, in some way, benefit from the work being done by designers, especially when asking them to work on projects or problems currently being tackled internally. Not to mention the fact that this is often work done free of charge (i.e. [spec work](https://www.nospec.com/)) and is sometimes work done outside of the actual interviews. Another common criticism is whether design challenges are even a helpful form of assessment. This critique poses that while design challenges require a significant amount of additional work, they don’t usually provide any insight that wouldn’t be gained from a portfolio review and/or discussion of work. They potentially introduce a lot of unfair advantages and disadvantages depending on candidates’ varying backgrounds and situations. For example, a take-home challenge might be doable for a recent graduate looking to land their first job, but what about a single parent who has a full-time job while also picking up side jobs to support their family?

At the end of the day, how ethical or not ethical the ask is from a company depends on various factors, and it’s also worth recognizing that what is or is not considered ethical varies from person to person. And even when a company makes a request that conflicts with your ethics, that doesn’t necessarily mean the company is intentionally unethical. However, it is worth reassessing whether this is still a place you’d like to work. If you’re still interested in pursuing the position, you might decide that it’s worth putting in the time and effort that they’re asking for, or you might offer an alternative that you find is more appropriate and fair. 

Here are a few things to keep in mind when you encounter a design challenge while interviewing with a company:
- **Your time and talent are valuable.** Remember, you deserve to get paid fairly for your work. Whenever you’re being asked to do pro bono work, consider whether the time and effort you’re putting in is worth it to you. It’s also worth assessing if what the company is asking for is reasonable. For example, take-home challenges are a much bigger ask than an onsite challenge. Take-home challenges are completed on a candidate’s own time and usually don’t require nearly as much time on the interviewer’s end. Onsite challenges are more likely to require time on the interviewer’s end and, as such, they often occur at later stages in the interview process. 
- **Make sure you’ve invested before committing.** If a design challenge is one of the very first steps in the interview process, it’s worth weighing how much time and effort they’re asking for vs. how invested you are in the position. More than likely, you’re still figuring out if this is even a job that you’re interested in, let alone if you’re willing to put in a few hours of unpaid work for it. For this reason, design challenges are often reserved for later stages of the interview process when it’s more clear whether or not it’s a good fit for both the company and the interviewee. If you’re asked to do a design challenge in really early stages, a good option is to ask for an informational interview so that you can get a better idea of the role before committing to it.
- **It might reflect the work you’ll be doing, but it shouldn’t be the actual work.** While context is important, it can quickly become questionable when a company is asking you to solve a current business problem or to complete work for a project they’re actively working on. In this scenario, you can assume that the company will benefit from your ideas and work, and so you might reassess whether or not this is okay with you. Better yet, it might be good to reassess if this is okay with you if, worst-case scenario, you don’t end up getting the job.

---
# Quiz
1. Criticism of design challenges is typically about: 
	1. Companies who benefit in some way from the work done by the designer. 
	2. As a form of assessment, they might not provide enough insight about the candidate. 
	3. They give unfair advantages to some candidates over others. 
	4. All of the above (correct)
2. T or F: If you are given a design challenge as the first step in an interview process, it is fair for you to ask for an informational interview before you commit your time to a design challenge. (T)