# Planning and Facilitating a Workshop
Planning and facilitating workshops are no simple tasks. They can take up to weeks of planning to get right, but you’ll often find yourself in situations where you need to produce a workshop in a very short amount of time. When that’s the case, there are a few key best practices for planning and facilitating a workshop.
### When planning a workshop:
- **Set clear intention and objectives:** Before even jumping into planning, align on goals for the workshop. Answer questions like: What are we trying to achieve? Is a workshop the best way to achieve these goals? Objectives might be team-oriented, focusing on alignment and buy-in, or more tactically focused, like uncovering more insights for a specific business challenge. Whatever the case, defining clear goals will help your team to focus and prioritize, as well as allow you to assess the outcomes afterward.
- **Break it down into easy-to-follow steps:** If a workshop is overly complicated, it’s more likely to confuse your participants and less likely to yield positive results. It will also become more challenging to facilitate, especially when you’re new to leading workshops; the simpler, the better. An excellent way to do this is by doing a practice run-through before the real deal to get a better sense of the order and flow of each step. You might consider: How realistic are our estimated time frames to complete each step? How difficult is it for participants to context switch when moving from one step to another? How would we prioritize these steps?
- **Identify all necessary preparations:** Workshops require many behind-the-scenes planning and coordination around supplies, software, roles, space, and facilitation points. Thoughtfully prepare everything you need and might need during the workshop. Above all, make sure that you show up ready to facilitate since participants will be relying on you for direction and guidance. Put together a facilitation outline that you can easily reference and do a few practice run-throughs beforehand to get familiar and comfortable with it. It’s also a good practice to run through some worst-case scenarios, so your team is prepared for any necessary damage control.
### When facilitating a workshop:
- **Be prepared:** Preparation can’t be stressed enough since it can make or break a workshop. Keep in mind that you’re asking your audience to participate, which can be very uncomfortable for some people. Coming prepared with clear goals, a set plan, and guided steps for the activity provides some reassuring structure and organization to help make people feel more at ease.
- **Be flexible:** At the same time, always be ready to improvise when needed. No matter how much you prepare ahead of time, you should expect that there will always be unplanned and unexpected events. The most important thing is to stay calm and keep moving forward. The more confident you are to adapt in the moment, the more confident your participants will feel going along with it. They might not even notice that you went off of the original plan.
- **Be open-minded:** Your role as facilitator is to ensure that everyone feels acknowledged and welcome to participate. This often means putting aside your own opinions and preferences aside to create space for differing opinions and preferences. By embracing new ideas and approaches, you’ll set an example for participants to follow.
### Defining Roles
When preparing for a workshop, it’s also good to define roles. Especially when working within teams, you might find that roles need to change throughout the workshop. For example, you might designate someone to be the lead facilitator during a group discussion, but then later on, it makes sense for them to be responsible for documenting insights during a brainstorming activity. Without clear alignment on role expectations, you can quickly find yourself leading a very disorganized activity.

Aside from roles needing to be dynamic throughout the workshop, you’ll find that role may also need to blend a few key responsibilities. For example, you might need someone to be both the facilitator leading a workshop activity while also mediating discussions and disagreements that arise during the exercise. Depending on the needs of the role, this might impact who you designate to take on the role as well as how they can best prepare for it. Whatever the case, always make sure that everyone involved knows who’s doing what and when. 
- A **facilitator** keeps workshops productive by managing clear expectations and guiding discussions. Being a good facilitator extends beyond productivity and ensures the meeting is enjoyable and inclusive. They create a safe space for everyone to contribute.
- A **presenter** or, better yet, a storyteller shares the journey and learnings. They help to contextualize decisions that were made through information and visuals. A good storyteller knows how to draw the audience in with a compelling yet honest narrative.
- A **researcher** is always listening and learning throughout a meeting. They ensure that critical information is being captured and documented. They’re often taking copious amounts of notes and even synthesizing takeaways at the moment. 
- A **mediator** helps to navigate group discussions and disagreements. Their goal is to get to a place of alignment and compromise.
### Involving the Right People
Keep in mind that to get valuable outcomes from a workshop, you need to make sure that you’re involving the right audiences at the correct times. You might consider: **What team roles are essential to involve and at what stage? When does it make sense to leverage activities that involve the entire team vs. breakout groups vs. individuals?**

Being thoughtful of when and how you involve certain business stakeholders and team members can help to ensure you’re getting a good mix of perspectives and backgrounds while also avoiding potential groupthink when needed. Don’t be afraid to ask the client to direct you to a different person.
