#prework
# What is a wireframe?
A wireframe is a visual guide of a website or app, demonstrating the information architecture, navigation, content, and functionality. Wireframes allow designers to easily visualize and test designs before spending too much time and effort on aesthetics. They’re often leveraged in conjunction with other artifacts, such as storyboards and flowcharts, to strategize the overall experience of a product better. Like a blueprint for a house, wireframes are two-dimensional with limited use of color and visual styling, often appearing in grayscale.

Wireframes are made up of static screens, meaning that they’re not interactive. This makes it easier to focus on the content and infrastructure of the design. Wireframes may be leveraged to troubleshoot high-level interaction and functionality considerations. Still, they won’t be as effective in conveying and testing complex interactions, animations, transitions, or gestures of a product. They can communicate where a point of interaction begins and ends, but not what happens in between. For example, you might create two wireframe screens, screen A and screen B. On screen A, you depict a button that, when clicked, takes the user to screen B. While your wireframe screens communicate the catalyst of the interaction (i.e., the button on screen A) and the result of the interaction (i.e. screen B), it doesn’t convey the actual interaction itself. What happens when the button is clicked? Is there a loading screen when navigating to screen B? How does screen B appear? In these cases, when needing to communicate and test more complex interaction and usability of a product, wireframe screens can be leveraged to create [prototypes](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ux-prototype-hi-lo-fidelity/).

---